hi my name is Susan Palmer and I would
like to help you learn how to play the
guitar this lesson covers pages 8
through 15 in the book the guitar lesson
companion if you don't already own a
copy you can pick one up today at lead
cap press comm I first want to take you
through the different parts of the
instrument this is the head this is the
neck this is the body this is the bridge
this is the sound hole this is the nut
these are the tuners and these metal
strips here are called the frets when
you play the guitar you're going to
place your fingers directly behind those
metal frets and the spaces here this
would be referred to as the first fret
this is the second fret the third fret
and so on I want to get your fingers
warmed up with your first exercise
called the 1 2 3 4 exercise I named this
exercise after my first 4 fingers
1 2 3 & 4 you're gonna hold your pick
gently but firmly between your thumb and
your first finger and you're gonna use a
downward motion with that pick when
you're playing the strings now take your
fretting hand take the first finger
there put that on the lowest or thickest
string directly behind that first metal
fret and go ahead and play that first
note the next note you're gonna play on
the same string this time with your
second finger on the second fret your
third finger will play the note on the
third fret and your fourth finger will
play the note on the fourth fret I'm
going to continue up the rest of the the
strings there
now I'm gonna go in reverse
now I played it much faster than I want
you to play it I want you to go for good
clear sounds and in order to try to use
your fingertips that's going to develop
your calluses so that you can play
chords and single notes a lot easier
let's talk about standard music notation
I'm sure you could tell me the names of
many guitar players who don't know how
to read the music for still great guitar
players if you don't know how to read
music it's going to take you longer to
finger figure things out and you're not
going to be able to take part in the
musical conversation between musicians
that's why it's so important that you
know this I'm gonna try to make it as
easy for you as possible now on your own
I want you to read through this page to
make sure you understand everything but
I'm going to give you the quick
run-through right here these five lines
are called the staff this symbol here is
a treble clef anytime you see this
treble clef you can play the music on
guitar flute violin piano a lot of
different instruments use that treble
clef we put notes on the lines and notes
in the spaces and we've named those
notes after the first seven letters of
the alphabet
ABCDEF and g music is divided into
measures and we separate those measures
with bar lines at the end of a piece
you're gonna see a double bar line for
right now we're going to be working with
four different note types whole notes
which get four beats half notes which
get two beats quarter notes which get
one beat and dotted half notes which get
three B's right now the music we play is
going to be in 4/4 that means that
you're gonna be counting one two three
four one two three four now let's go
over the notes on that first string this
is your high E string we have two e
strings on the guitar a high E string
and a low e-string the high E string is
higher in pitch than the low E string
these notes are going to be on the high
E string the first note is open E just
like I just played it there the note F
looks like this on the staff and you
play F with your first finger directly
behind that first metal fret on your
high E string and the note G you play
with your third finger directly behind
that third fret on that high E string so
once again we have G I want you to study
this over here make sure you know the
name of the note and you know how to
play each note on the stuff to help you
have a note identification worksheet
over here I want you to fill this out
write the name of the note beneath the
the staff on the first part of the
exercises and down here draw the note on
the staff now it's time for our rhythm
in example number 9 on page 12 I've got
a whole line of whole notes I'm gonna
play the first two measures for you so
you get a feel for them 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4
1 2 3 4 so remember that whole notes get
four whole counts half notes get half of
that or two counts so I'm going to play
the first two measures of one and ten
here so you get a feel for those half
notes 1 2 3 4 2 3
two three or now I'm going to play the
first two measures of line 13 these are
quarter notes a quarter note gets one
beat each one two three four so I want
you to be able to play through the whole
page here counting out loud
using your metronome on page 13 I
introduced the dyed half note a dotted
half note is worth three counts I'm
gonna play the first two measures here
on number 17 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 so
now if you understand your notes and you
understand your rhythms and you will do
that by it you will know that by
completing the note identification
worksheet and working through these
rhythm studies then you can play your
first reading study the reading studies
put together all the rhythms and all the
notes that you know so far so we're
working with the notes EF and G and the
the type of notes whole notes half notes
quarter notes and dotted half notes up
here this is a symbol for a whole note
rest you're going to be silent for 4
counts I also have some chord symbols up
here these are the symbols that the band
is using to play the music on the
backing track so you have the CD that
goes along with these reading studies
hopefully that'll make it a little more
interesting and sound kind of cool to
you so I want you to use that and the
band will be playing behind you so you
can do pages 14 and 15 if you've gone
over your rhythms and you know those
notes EF of G so practice the 1 2 3 4
exercise all of the things that we've
just gone over here and perfect pages 14
and 15 before moving on so work hard
have fun and thanks